[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> A new study records the
brain waves of a dying person
in detail for the
very first time.
Can the findings explain what
happens during our transition
into death?
>> The more we can learn about
the brain and its relationship
to a phenomenal
experience, the better.
>> This is "Gaia News."
[THEME MUSIC]
While there is plenty of
anecdotal evidence from people
who have had Near-Death
Experiences or NDEs,
there is little to no
hard scientific data
on what happens in the
brain as people are dying.
Now researchers who recorded 15
minutes of brainwave activity
in a dying man are speculating
that the findings may
explain the phenomenon
of life recall
or review that
many NDErs report.
Dr. Alexander is a neurosurgeon
who in 2008 experienced an NDE
as he lay in a coma
caused by a serious case
of bacterial
meningoencephalitis.
After a miraculous
recovery, he went on
to study and write
about the experience
in several bestselling books.
>> There's a tremendous amount
of evidence that at the end
of life, our consciousness does
not just disappear as one might
assume if the brain
created consciousness.
But in fact, our
conscious awareness
seems to expand
in dramatic ways.
And I think this is where a
deeper understanding of NDEs
is crucial for us to understand
the mind-brain relationship
and the nature of
consciousness itself.
>> To Dr. Alexander, while the
study is a step in the right
direction towards understanding
what happens when we die,
it is fraught with
some misunderstandings.
>> Now there are many
problems with the study,
and the main things that I'll
point out here is first of all,
do not confuse correlation
with causality.
This is a common
mistake in neuroscience,
and it results from the
unproven assumption-- in fact,
I would say a
disproven assumption--
that the brain is
creating consciousness.
And therefore, to
find any change
in phenomenal
consciousness, we must
look for a neural correlate,
some physiologic change
in the brain.
And modern studies just show
that that reasoning is false,
that we have to--
there's more to it
than just what's
going on in the brain.
>> Some of the strongest
evidence for this thinking
comes out of recent studies
using sophisticated brain
imaging of participants
on psychedelics.
>> They universally show a
decrease in brain activity
and a dissolution of things like
the default mode network that
is thought to be so responsible
for our sense of self
and existence in the moment.
And if those things kind
of dissolve and disappear
under the influence of these
plant medicines or entheogens,
as I like to call
them, all other bets
about looking at
neuronal activity
to try and match it up
to phenomenal experience
are really off.
The important thing
to get is the brain
is not the creator of these
phenomenal experiences.
It's a filter, so it influences
the experience that we have.
But it's not ultimately the
complete explanation for them.
>> What can be said about the
findings of the recent study
that suggests that the pattern
of brain activity recorded
corresponds to memory recall,
and may provide a physiological
basis for the life review
as experienced by NDErs?
>> Memories that are encountered
in near-death experiences such
as the life review are not just
vague, sepia-tinted memories.
These are reliving
of the events in
a detailed, powerful fashion.
Memories are not even
stored in the brain.
That's one of the last
nails in the coffin
of materialist neuroscience.
>> Dr. Alexander and other
proponents of a broader
approach to studying dying have
high hopes that we are headed
in the right direction.
>> The message is very clear.
When you study consciousness
in large fashion,
including all the evidence
for non-local consciousness
and the rich reports of
near-death and shared death
experiences,
out-of-body experiences,
telepathy, things like
that, and then of course
you get into that rich
literature on reincarnation,
all this is telling
us is we need
a much bigger
theater of operations
to explain all this than our
simple notions of the material
and physical world
being all there is.
This is a pathway forward
for a deeper understanding
of what happens when we die.
>> For a new perspective,
this is "Gaia News."
For more information
on this topic,
check out this content on Gaia.